---
title: "Introduction"
weight: 1
---

Quantum computers are different from traditional computers in the sense that bits are replaced by qubits. Quantum computers can use properties of quantum mechanics such as entanglement and interference to design algorithms that perform much better than traditional computers. For instance, no known classical algorithm can factor large integers in polynomial time, but Shor's algorithm can factor integers in polynomial time [[1]](https://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/9508027). Quantum computers also hold great promise for simulating molecular systems, since molecules are themselves inherently quantum mechanical [[2]](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.09976).

Different companies are betting on different technologies used to design a qubit, such as photons, superconducting circuits, trapped ions, and spins in semiconductors. All of these platforms suffer from the same fate: the qubits are very fragile. Qubits are easily affected by noise, which can take the form of heat, stray electromagnetic fields, or even cosmic rays. Noise changes the state of the qubits and can easily render the output of a quantum algorithm useless. In contrast, classical bits are robust, held in a definite state of on/off with a very low probability of error at the hardware level.

To mitigate the unavoidable effects of noise on a qubit, we need to implement a protocol that actively detects and corrects errors as they occur on the quantum computer. The main approach to achieve this is through quantum error correction.

There is an already developed theory of classical error correction used in storing data and network communication. However, adopting these principles for quantum error correction is not straightforward. In classical error correction we can simply duplicate the information we are trying to protect and use this redundancy as a means of detecting errors. In the quantum case, we cannot copy the information, as we are limited by the no-cloning theorem, which states that we cannot copy an unknown quantum state. Furthermore, it is not possible to simply check the state of the qubits to see if an error has occurred, as the act of measuring destroys the very information we are trying to protect. As such, we need to carefully choose measurements that tell us what type of error has occurred without destroying the quantum information. These difficulties were the reasons why physicists initially thought that quantum error correction would not be possible.

The breakthrough came from a paper published in 1995 by Peter Shor [[3]](https://www.cs.miami.edu/home/burt/learning/Csc670.052/pR2493_1.pdf) proposing a quantum error correction protocol. The protocol protects quantum information by entangling it across multiple qubits. The procedure can be used to suppress quantum errors provided certain physical conditions on the qubits themselves are met. This demonstration ushered in a stream of different error correction protocols with practical possibility.

In these articles, my objective is to explain the concept of quantum error correction from the basics to current research. Anyone with a basic understanding of quantum mechanics should be able to follow along. I will not only explain the theory but also simulate different error correction protocols using STIM. I hope you enjoy the series.
